---
title: Gippsland Plain
regions:
  - Gippsland Plain
images:
  - src: https://data.rbg.vic.gov.au/images/P/Library/69701?b=512
    caption: >
      <b>Gippsland Plain; <i>Leptospermum myrsinoides</i> heathland/woodland. 
      <i>Eucalyptus willisii</i> woodland, with heathy understorey including 
      <i>Banksia marginata</i>, <i>Leptospermum myrsinoide</i>, <i>Monotoca 
      scoparia</i>, <i>Pteridium esculentum</i>, <i>Ricinocarpus pinifolius</i> 
      and <i>Xanthorrhoea minor</i>. Holey Plains State Park.</b>
  - src: https://data.rbg.vic.gov.au/images/P/Library/69703?b=512
    caption: >
      <b>Gippsland Plain; saltmarsh-mangrove. Saltmarsh in foreground with 
      <i>Sarcocornia quinqueflora</i>, <i>Sclerostegia arbuscula</i> and 
      <i>Suaeda australis</i>, merging seaward to <i>Avicennia marina</i> zone, 
      with intervening tussocks of <i>Stipa stipoides</i> and <i>Gahnia 
      trifida</i>. Toora, Corner Inlet (Wilsons Promontory in background).</b>
---

## Location

<bioregion-map-component :regions="regions"></bioregion-map-component>

This region includes the area south of the mountainous country of the Eastern Highlands (below elevations of about 200 metres) to the Victorian coast of Bass Strait, excluding the Strzelecki Ranges (included in the Gippsland Highlands) and Wilsons Promontory. The eastern boundary between this region and East Gippsland has been arbitrarily defined as the eastern shoreline of the lakes from Lakes Entrance to the mouth of the Tambo River (at Lake King), then the Princes Highway to Lucknow, west along the Lucknow to Iguana Creek Road, with Stockdale the most westerly point. The western boundary between this region and the Victorian Volcanic Plain Region is largely defined by the geological boundary between the Upper Cainozoic (Quaternary) basalts (Newer Volcanics of the latter region) and the marine and non-marine Cainozoic alluvia, including the fluviatile sands and gravels of this region. Much of the Port Phillip Bay Sunkland and neighbouring non-volcanic sediments are included in the region.

Major grids N, P, S, T, W and X. Approximate area 15 054 km<sup>2</sup>.

## Major landforms

Much of the region consists of flat to slightly undulating Cainozoic sediments that form a coastal plain. The plain to the west of the Strzelecki Ranges gently slopes to the west, whereas those to the east gently slope to the east. In the eastern parts of the region, the fluviatile sands and gravels of plains are underlain by marine Cainozoic sediments. In the central area the Cainozoic sediments are non-marine and consist of lignites (brown coals), clays, sands and gravels (Hills 1940; Gibbons and Rowan, this volume). Details of the geological history of the region are given in Anon. (1972b, 1980b), Jenkin (1971) and Douglas (this volume).

## Climate

The region experiences a temperate climate with a transition from a winter rainfall maximum (in the western parts) typical of the southern Australian coastline to the more uniform rainfall (in the eastern parts) of coastal south-eastern Australia. Mean annual rainfall varies from about 550 to 1120 mm, with the wettest months usually being from May to October. The area to the east of the Strzelecki Ranges is in a rainshadow zone. For example, there is a decrease in the mean annual rainfall from Madalya in the Gippsland Highlands to Yarram in this region (a distance of 18 km) of 500 mm. There is a further decrease in the mean annual rainfall of 170 mm from Yarram to Seaspray (to the east) (Anon. 1980b). A similar decrease in rainfall occurs from west to east in the Latrobe Valley. The temperatures are relatively mild throughout the region, with the highest temperature maxima usually occurring in the Latrobe Valley and, in general, inland from the coast. Typical mean daily maxima range from 13°C to 26°C, with mean daily minima ranging from 3°C to 15°C. July is the coldest month, and February the warmest. Frosts are relatively infrequent near the coast, becoming more frequent and severe inland. See also ‘Climate of Victoria’ (this volume).

## Vegetation

The vegetation has been significantly disturbed, or totally removed over large areas, for agricultural purposes. In the western part of this region, particularly around Port Phillip Bay, an ever-increasing area is being alienated by residential and industrial development.

### Forests and woodlands

#### Damp/wet sclerophyll forests

_Eucalyptus viminalis_ dominates an open-forest on immature, stream-line soils (mean annual rainfall 780–990 mm), in gullies of permanent streams on the Mornington Peninsula. _E. obliqua_ is often a co-dominant, or is associated with this community. The ferns of the understorey consist of _Blechnum nudum_, _Calochlaena dubia_, _Cyathea australis_ and _Pteridium esculentum_. Other understorey and ground-layer species include _Acacia dealbata_, _Clematis aristata_, _Coprosma quadrifida_, _Olearia argophylla_, _O. lirata_, _Pandorea pandorana_, _Parsonsia brownii_, _Poa labillardieri_, _P. sieberiana_, _Pomaderris aspera_ and _Rapanea howittiana_. Many of these species are absent or uncommon in the other communities on the Mornington Peninsula. Most of the few remnants of this community are seriously disturbed.

An open to tall open-forest commonly occurs on well-drained, sandy loam soils in flat to undulating country of the Strzelecki Ranges (Gippsland Highlands), and extends south into the Gippsland Plain. This community is extremely variable, both floristically and structurally. Since the destruction of most of the wet sclerophyll forest (either through clearing by early settlers or by bushfires), damp sclerophyll forest has become the most heavily utilized community for timber production and allied forest products (e.g woodchips) (Gullan et al. 1984, 1985). The dominant eucalypts include _Eucalyptus consideniana_, _E. cypellocarpa_, _E. obliqua_ and _E. radiata_. The understorey is commonly dominated by _Acacia dealbata_, _A. mucronata_, _A. verticillata_, _Billardiera scandens_, _Cassinia aculeata_, _Epacris impressa_, _Gahnia radula_, _Gonocarpus tetragynus_, _G. teucrioides_, _Goodenia ovata_, _Lomandra filiformis_, _L. longifolia_, _Platylobium formosum_, _Pteridium esculentum_, _Pultenaea juniperina_ and _Tetrarrhena juncea_. Opie et al. (1984a, 1984b) recognize several subcommunities on French Island. _Eucalyptus cypellocarpa_/_E. obliqua_-dominated damp sclerophyll forest extends from the Dandenong Ranges (Eastern Highlands) to the undulating lowlands of the eastern suburbs of metropolitan Melbourne. Although it is hard to imagine now, _E. obliqua_ once grew at Hawthorn (Jones et al. 1986). The _E. cypellocarpa_/_E. obliqua_ community is not common in this region, but in general occurs as outliers of those found in the Gippsland Highlands or the Eastern Highlands.

#### Dry sclerophyll forest

The dry sclerophyll forests are open-forests which occur throughout the region. The eucalypts that dominate the community include _Eucalyptus obliqua_, _E. radiata_ and _E. viminalis_. In the wetter areas (mean annual rainfall 900–1100 mm), the community is dominated by _E. obliqua_, _E. globoidea_ and _E. radiata_ (e.g. in the Pakenham area), where it occurs on deep loam soils or shallow, rocky soils of gently sloping ground (50–200 metres altitude). The understorey and ground-layer are usually very open and are dominated by grasses (e.g. _Deyeuxia quadriseta_, _Imperata cylindrica_, _Microlaena stipoides_ and _Poa_ spp.,), and small shrubs and herbs (e.g. _Acacia stricta_, _Acrotriche prostrata_, _Adiantum aethiopicum_, _Cassinia aculeata_, _Dichondra repens_, _Epacris impressa_, _Glycine clandestina_, _Gonocarpus tetragynus_, _Lomandra filiformis_, _L. longifolia_, _Pteridium esculentum_, _Senecio quadridentatus_ and _Viola hederacea_). In drier areas (e.g. Holey Plains, mean annual rainfall 620–780 mm), this community occurs on loam to sandy-loam soils (80–200 metres altitude). Here, the dominant canopy species are _Eucalyptus globoidea_ and _E. consideniana_. The understorey is very species-poor, with dense stands of _Gahnia radula_, _Kunzea ericoides_ and _Pteridium esculentum_. Other common species include _Hibbertia acicularis_, _Lomandra filiformis_, _Monotoca scoparia_, _Pimelea humilis_ and _Xanthorrhoea minor_. This latter subcommunity is severely disturbed and supports fewer species than it would have in pre-European times (Opie et al. 1984a, 1984b).

The dry sclerophyll forest community on the Mornington Peninsula has been extensively cleared for agriculture. Remnants of _Eucalyptus obliqua_/*E. radiata-*dominated open-forest or woodland occur in strongly acidic, sandy soils on the Mornington Peninsula. The understorey is dominated by _Acrotriche serrulata_, _Epacris impressa_, _Hydrocotyle laxiflora_, _Poa labillardieri_, _P. sieberiana_, _Pteridium esculentum_, _Viola hederacea_ and _Xanthorrhoea australis_. Other open-forest alliances on the Mornington Peninsula include a _Eucalyptus obliqua_-dominated dry sclerophyll forest that occurs on yellow podsolic soils derived from basalt or granite (mean annual rainfall 780–970 mm) (Calder 1986). This alliance has a similar, but denser and more species-diverse understorey than the previous alliance. The other common understorey species are _Acacia verticillata_, _Billardiera scandens_, _Hypericum gramineum_, _Leptospermum continentale_ and _Ozothamnus ferrugineus_. This alliance also occurs on deep krasnozem soils (mean annual rainfall 860–1000 mm) (Calder 1986). _Eucalyptus cephalocarpa_, _E. dives_, _E. macrorhyncha_ and _E. polyanthemos_ dominate a dry sclerophyll forest alliance that occurs on the skeletal soils of the undulating lowlands and foothills in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne.

#### Grassy woodland

An open-forest or woodland community is found on flat to gently undulating, well-drained loams to clay-loam soils. The dominant eucalypts include _Eucalyptus bridgesiana_ (_sensu lato_), _E. muelleriana_ (both characteristic of the alliance to the south and east of the Strzelecki Ranges), _E. radiata_ and _E. viminalis_ (the latter two being characteristic of the alliances to the north of the Strzelecki Ranges) and occur over an understorey largely of grasses (e.g. _\*Cynosurus echinatus_, _\*Holcus lanatus_, _Microlaena stipoides_, _Poa_ spp. and _Themeda triandra_), other monocotyledons and herbaceous dicotyledons (e.g. _\*Cirsium vulgare_, _Dichondra repens_, _Gahnia radula_, _Gonocarpus tetragynus_, _Hydrocotyle laxiflora_, _Lomandra filiformis_, _L. longifolia_, _Oxalis_ spp., _Pteridium esculentum_, _\*Stellaria media_ and _\*Trifolium_ spp.). Shrubs are locally abundant but not usually dominant in the understorey. Common shrubs include _Acrotriche serrulata_, _Astroloma humifusum_, _Bossiaea prostrata_, _Hibbertia riparia_, _Leptospermum continentale_, _Pimelea linifolia_ and _Xanthorrhoea minor_. Because of the relatively flat terrain on which this community is found, small depressions may become seasonally waterlogged. In these depressions _Eucalyptus ovata_ is usually the dominant tree species, and a _Melaleuca ericifolia_ shrubland community can develop beneath it. A grassy woodland dominated by _Allocasuarina verticillata_ once occurred over large areas of the Mornington Peninsula (Calder, W. 1986), and occurred as a narrow band from Maribyrnong to Williamstown (Jones et al. 1986). Only remnants of this community remain. The understorey and ground-layer include _Acacia retinodes_, _Clematis microphylla_, _Dichondra repens_, _Leptospermum laevigatum_, _Leucopogon parviflorus_, _Melaleuca lanceolata_, _Pimelea serpyllifolia_, _Poa poiformis_ and _Swainsona lessertiifolia_.

Remnant stands of _Eucalyptus camaldulensis_-dominated grassy woodland occur at Dandenong, Essendon (Napier Hill), Gellibrand Hill, Balwyn (Belmont Park), Bundoora (Gresswell Flora Reserve), and many individual old trees persist throughout the suburbs (e.g. along Glen-ferrie Road in Kooyong (Jones et al. 1986). An _E. leucoxylon_-dominated alliance still occurs at Studley Park, even though the area is now heavily infested by alien plants.

_Eucalyptus tereticornis_ woodland/open-forest, with a _Themeda triandra_ understorey, was once very extensive on the Traralgon–Sale plains. Large areas of _Themeda_-dominated grassland (without trees) once occurred in a mosaic with _Eucalyptus tereticornis_ open-forest in the Stratford area (Scarlett, pers. comm., 1988).

A _Eucalyptus pauciflora_–_E. rubida_–_E. ovata_ grassy woodland once occurred between Traralgon and the Haunted Hills on yellow solodic soils (Scarlett, pers. comm. 1988). This community has been largely eliminated, and only remnants survive along roadsides. _E. bridgesiana_ (_sensu lato_) dominated the more elevated areas.

Grassy woodland has been heavily grazed throughout its range in the region. As a consequence, it is the most fragmented and weedy of the communities in this region.

#### Coast Banksia woodland

_Banksia integrifolia_ dominates a low open-forest to woodland on well-drained, nutrient-deficient calcareous sands, inland of the primary dunes of coastal areas (mean annual rainfall 700–800 mm) (e.g. along the leeward side of the Ninety Mile Beach). The understorey is dominated by smaller sclerophyllous shrubs (e.g. _Astroloma humifusum_, _Hibbertia sericea_ and _Leucopogon parviflorus_), herbs (e.g. _Carpobrotus rossii_, _\*Conyza bonariensis_, _Dichondra repens_, _Galium propinquum_, _Leucophyta brownii_, _Lomandra longifolia_, _Pteridium esculentum_, _Rhagodia candolleana_ and _Senecio lautus_), grasses (_\*Aira caryophyllea_ and _Poa_ spp.) and sedges (e.g. _Isolepis marginata_, _I. nodosa_, _Lepidosperma concavum_ and _L. gladiatum_). The introduced grass _\*Ammophila arenaria_ is commonly planted as a sand-binder. The frequency of the native _Spinifex sericeus_ appears to have decreased since the introduction of the former grass (Gullan, Walsh & Forbes 1981). This community is now relatively uncommon in central Gippsland because the land has been cleared right up to the coastline. The community occurs on the south-west coast of Westernport Bay (between Sandy Point and Flinders), at the mouth of Bruthen Creek and on Snake Island. The Westernport Bay subcommunity has an overstorey of _Eucalyptus pryoriana_.

### Heathlands and shrublands

#### Leptospermum myrsinoides heathland/open-woodland

The shrub-layer of this community is always dominated by the dense shrub _Leptospermum myrsinoides_ (Silky Tea-tree). In the more western areas of the region (e.g. Mornington Peninsula) this community often exists without trees, or with only a sparse tree cover, hence varying from a closed-heath to an open-woodland. In the central areas of the Gippsland Plain, the tree-layer is usually well developed and results in a woodland with a heathy understorey on flat to undulating plains, in deep sandy soils (mean annual rainfall 700–900 mm). In the south _Eucalyptus pryoriana_ is the major tree species, in the central region (e.g. Mullungdung and Boodyarn Forests) _E. consideniana_ and _E. radiata_ are the commonest species, and in the north-east (e.g. Holey Plains) _E. willisii_ is the commonest species (Plate 6Z). This community just extends into the Gippsland Highlands. The shrub-layer is dominated by sclerophyllous shrubs (e.g. _Acacia oxycedrus_, _Aotus ericoides_, _Bossiaea cinerea_, _Dillwynia glaberrima_, _Epacris impressa_, _Gahnia radula_, _Hibbertia acicularis_, _Leptospermum continentale_, _Leucopogon ericoides_, _L. virgatus_, _Lomandra longifolia_, _Monotoca scoparia_ and _Xanthorrhoea minor_). In all areas _Banksia marginata_ and/or _B. serrata_ are usually also abundant. Gullan et al. (1984, 1985) and Opie et al. (1984a, 1984b) recognized several subcommunities in the central Gippsland and Westernport Bay areas, respectively. This community is common in the Holey Plains area (south-east of the Strzelecki Ranges), south and west of Sperm Whale Head, the Hastings area and French Island.

<markdown-figure-component :src="images[0].src" :caption="images[0].caption"></markdown-figure-component>

#### Coast Tea-tree scrub

An open- to closedshrubland dominated by _Leptospermum laevigatum_ occurs on coastal (altitude sea-level to 100 metres) calcareous sands (mean annual rainfall 700–1000 mm). The canopy of _Leptospermum laevigatum_ is often so dense that understorey and ground-layer are suppressed. More open subcommunities include _Leucopogon parviflorus_ and _Banksia integrifolia_ as co-dominants. Common species associated with this community include _Clematis microphylla_, _Daucus glochidiatus_, _Dichondra repens_, _Isolepis nodosa_, _Rhagodia candolleana_, orchids and _Senecio lautus_. This community is widespread along the coast of Phillip Island and along the south-west coast of the mainland between Sandy Point and Flinders, and at Sandy Point on French Island. Old stands of very tall plants of _Leptospermum laevigatum_ (_c._ 10 metres high) occur at Yaringa, Cannons Creek and Chinaman Island (all in Westernport Bay) (Opie et al. 1984a, 1984b).

During the mid-nineteenth century much of the Mornington Peninsula was seriously disturbed by timber-cutters and lime-burners who removed all large trees and scraped much of the surface (Calder, W. 1986). The _Allocasuarina verticillata_-dominated grassy woodland was largely replaced by _Leptospermum laevigatum_ which spread inland from its normally restricted zone along the shoreline. The resultant community now almost totally excludes _Allocasuarina verticillata_.

#### Coastal heathland to open scierophyll woodland

A wet closed-heath to open-woodland occurs on poorly drained sandy or clayey soils, principally of near-coastal areas. The dominant species of this community, _Melaleuca squarrosa_ and _Leptospermum continentale_, form a dense community and produce a very deep leaf-litter layer. The understorey and ground-layer are very open to scattered. An open-heath to sedgeland occurs on wetter sites, particularly when there is standing water for long periods (e.g. French Island). The generally shaded and waterlogged substrate is most successfully colonized by members of the Restionaceae (e.g. particularly _Empodisma minus_ and _Leptocarpus tenax_) and Cyperaceae (e.g. _Baumea juncea_, _Gahnia radula_, _Lepidosperma filiforme_, _L. longitudinale_, _L. neesii_, _Schoenus apogon_, _S. brevifolius_, _S. latelaminatus_ and _S. tenuissimus_). Scattered examples of this community occur on French Island, at Holey Plains and at Gellions Run (near Alberton). Other common species, particularly on drier sites, include _Allocasuarina paludosa_, _Burchardia umbellata_, _Caesia parviflora_, _Centrolepis aristata_, _Dampiera stricta_, _Danthonia setacea_, _Dillwynia glaberrima_, _Epacris gunnii_, _E. impressa_, _Goodenia humilis_, _Hibbertia procumbens_, _H. riparia_, _Leptospermum myrsinoides_, _Lindsaea linearis_, _Selaginella uliginosa_ and _Xanthosia pusilla_. _Eucalyptus kitsoniana_ occurs on wet solodic soils, whereas _E. pryoriana_ occurs as an overstorey on drier soils (e.g. Gellions Run). ‘Grass-tree plains’ with _Xanthorrhoea resinosa_ dominant, and common in far East Gippsland, are represented by a disjunct western outlier near Gelliondale.

#### Melaleuca ericifolia scrub

A closed-scrub community dominated by thickets of _Melaleuca ericifolia_ (2–8 metres high) occurs on wet, heavy soils in lowland areas (altitude up to _c._ 70 metres). This species and _Phragmites australis_, both opportunistic, commonly occur on roadside verges, drains and damp depressions of disturbed sites. On clay-loam soils in highly disturbed, often pastoral sites, this community is often associated with riparian scrub or grassy woodland communities (e.g. Bittern, Mornington Peninsula, Morwell River, near Morwell, south of the Latrobe River, and west of Traralgon). On the Mornington Peninsula much of the area supporting this community has been drained and converted to pasture. The ground-layer is predominantly composed of introduced herbs (e.g _\*Cyperus eragrostis_, _\*Hypochoeris radicata_, _\*Myosotis laxa_, _\*Rorippa nasturtiumaquaticum_, _\*Rumex conglomeratus_). _Melaleuca ericifolia_ dominates a scrub subcommunity on the poorly drained sands in disturbed near-coastal areas between Port Welshpool and Port Albert (Gullan et al., 1984, 1985) with associated species including _Acacia longifolia_, _A. verticillata_, _Disphyma crassifolium_ subsp. _clavellatum_, _Rhagodia candolleana_ and _Senecio lautus_. At Gellions Run another subcommunity grows in association with the coastal wet heathland. The species of this subcommunity include _Baumea acuta_, _\*Centaurium tenuiflorum_, _Centella cordifolia_, _Deyeuxia densa_, _Gahnia trifida_, _Gnaphalium_ (_sensu lato_) spp., _Gonocarpus tetragynus_, _Goodenia humilis_, _\*Hypochoeris radicata_, _Lagenifera gracilis_, _Leptocarpus tenax_, _Leptospermum continentale_, _Lobelia alata_, _Schoenus tesquorum_ and _Selaginella uliginosa_. A similar subcommunity, in association with _Eucalyptus pryoriana_, occurs in the Westernport Bay area (Opie et al. 1984a, 1984b). A closed-scrub sub-community occurs on the poorly drained coastal mudflats that are inland from and associated with the saltmarsh community. These sites are dominated by _Melaleuca ericifolia_, with the understorey and ground-layer composed of a variety of typical saltmarsh species (e.g. _Disphyma crassifolium_ subsp. _clavellatum_, _Samolus repens_ and _Selliera radicans_). This subcommunity is common on the western shoreline of Westernport Bay (Calder 1986; Opie et al. 1984a, 1984b) (Figure 6.20) and on Snake Island (Gullan et al. 1984, 1985).

_Melaleuca squarrosa_ often dominates areas of waterlogged, strongly acidic sandy soils, sometimes with _M. ericifolia_ (e.g. in the Tootgarook Swamp, south-west of Rosebud, and Gellions Run).

### Freshwater and saltwater communities

#### Freshwater marsh

A community of aquatic vegetation occurs in pools of standing water on lowland farming areas (e.g. Gellions Run near Gelliondale, south of the Strzelecki Ranges) and in shallow, still water (e.g. billabongs) near the lower-altitude tributaries of the Morwell River. The most common species include _Lemna disperma_, _Spirodela punctata_ (both floating on the water surface), _Eleocharis sphacelata_, _Potamogeton_ spp., _Triglochin procerum_ and _Typha_ spp. (all the latter species being rooted in the substrate).

#### Sedge swampland

An open-sedgeland community usually occurs on seasonally inundated sites near the wetter parts of coastal heathland. In most cases the vegetation is dominated by one or two sedges that grow in dense swards, often to the exclusion of all other species (e.g. _Lepidosperma longitudinale_ and _L. laterale_). This community occurs at Gellions Run and Holey Plains. A _Schoenus brevifolius_-dominated subcommunity occurs near Cranbourne, in association with a _Eucalyptus cephalocarpa_/_E. pryoriana_ overstorey. Other commonly associated species include _Hakea ulicina_, _Lepidosperma longitudinale_, _Leptospermum continentale_ and _Lepyrodia muelleri_. Slightly drier sites usually support a floristically more diverse subcommunity (e.g. in scattered localities in the north-west of French Island).

#### Mangrove

A closed-heath or -scrub community consisting entirely of _Avicennia marina_ (White Mangrove) forms a broad zone between the saltmarsh community and the sea (Plate 6a). Meadows of _Zostera muelleri_ frequently occur on the seaward side of the mangroves. The mangroves occupy the zone between high and low tide levels. Hence, this monospecific community is regularly inundated by tidal waters. _Avicennia marina_ is shrub-like, and seldom exceeds heights of 2.5 metres. Usually, the community lacks an understorey, however, occasional saltmarsh species may be present. In Victoria the mangroves are virtually confined to this region, and occur on patches of muddy alluvium along the coast of Corner Inlet (the most southerly occurrence of the species), in Westernport and Port Phillip Bays. The distribution of this community has been significantly reduced since European settlement.

#### Saltmarsh

An open-shrubland to closed-herbfield community of salt-tolerant, often succulent species occurs on the intertidal mudflats of Corner Inlet and the offshore islands, Westernport and Port Phillip Bays (at sea-level). The community is markedly zoned into a number of recognizable subcommunities, from seaward to landward. The outermost (seaward) zone on mudflats subject to regular inundation is usually made up entirely of _Sarcocornia quinqueflora_. This subcommunity is immediately landward of the mangrove community. It also occurs along tidal creeks and inland in depressions that accumulate seawater from the higher tides of the year (Opie et al. 1984a, 1984b). The sub-shrub _Suaeda australis_ is often also present, particularly where large amounts of _Zostera muelleri_ and algal _Rhizoclonium_ spp. detritus are washed onto the beach (Bridgewater & Hughes 1974). Other species that are often present include _Distichlis distichophylla_, _Hemichroa pentandra_, _Samolus repens_, _Selliera radicans_ and _Triglochin striatum_. Landward of the above subcommunities, particularly on areas that have undergone greater mud accretion, is a heathland to low-shrubland that is dominated by, and sometimes made up entirely of, _Sclerostegia arbuscula_. A number of herbs make up the ground-layer. Species that occur in this association include _Hemichroa pentandra_, _Samolus repens_, _Sarcocornia quinqueflora_, _Suaeda australis_ and _Triglochin striatum_. _Sclerostegia arbuscula_-dominated subcommunities often intergrade with those dominated by _Sarcocornia quinqueflora_ (Plate 6a). _Atriplex paludosa_ is often present on drier sites. The driest and more elevated sites support _Stipa stipoides_, often to the exclusion of _Sclerostegia arbuscula_. _Gahnia filum_ occurs with _Sclerostegia arbuscula_ when the substrate is too wet for _Stipa stipoides_. _Juncus kraussii_ may also dominate this zone. Further inland is a closed-herbfield with a mixture of low herbs and semi-shrubs. This subcommunity represents the extreme landward edge of the saltmarsh preceding the _Melaleuca ericifolia_ shrubland. Common species include _Agrostis billardieri_, _Angianthus preissianus_, _\*Cotula coronopifolia_, _Disphyma crassifolium_ subsp. _clavellatum_, _Frankenia pauciflora_, _\*Parapholis incurva_, _Samolus repens_, _Sarcocornia quinqueflora_, _Schoenus nitens_ and _Sporobolus virginicus_.

<markdown-figure-component :src="images[1].src" :caption="images[1].caption"></markdown-figure-component>

### Coastal communities

#### Coastal dune scrub and coastal tussock grassland

These extremely exposed communities consist of grasses, sedges, herbs and salt-pruned shrubs. The calcareous sand of the primary dune open-shrubland alliance is dominated by _Acaena novae-zelandiae_, _Isolepis nodosa_ and _Poa poiformis_. Other common species include _Dianella revoluta_, _Geranium_ spp., _\*Holcus lanatus_, _\*Hypochoeris radicata_, _Leucophyta brownii_, _Oxalis radicosa_, _Senecio lautus_ and _Tetragonia implexicoma_. A tussock grassland alliance is now frequently dominated by the introduced grass _\*Ammophila arenaria_. This has largely replaced the native sand-binding grass _Spinifex sericeus_. This alliance shares many species with the former. Other common species include _Cardamine gunnii_, _Daucus glochidiatus_, _Olearia axillaris_, _Ozothamnus turbinatus_, _\*Polycarpon tetraphyllum_ and _Rhagodia candolleana_. Both alliances are easily disturbed, and in many areas have suffered from trampling. These communities are distributed along the length of the Ninety Mile Beach between Sea-spray and Lakes Entrance (Gullan, Walsh & Forbes 1981).

## Land use

The coast and the Gippsland Lakes are extensively used for recreation and commercial fishing. The main agricultural industries include dairying, and beef, lamb and wool production. Vegetable (particularly potato) production, is also an important agricultural activity. Relatively low-intensity hardwood production occurs in the region, whereas softwood production is more important. The forests and plantations are principally used for the production of wood-pulp. The brown coal deposits in the Yallourn Valley are a significant energy resource that is mined by open-cut techniques (Anon. 1980b). Off-shore oil and natural gas fields are also a valuable energy resource.

## National Parks

- Churchill—193 ha; Morwell—283 ha;
- Point Nepean—2450 ha; The Lakes—2390 ha;
- Wilsons Promontory (Yanakie Isthmus only)—900 ha.

## State Parks

- Arthurs Seat—350 ha;
- Corner Inlet Marine and Coastal Park—18 000 ha;
- French Island—8300 ha;
- Gippsland Lakes Coastal Park—17 200 ha;
- Holey Plains—10 576 ha;
- Nooramunga Marine and Coastal Park—15 000 ha;
- Shallow Inlet Marine and Coastal Park—2000 ha.
